---
layout: post
title: "Of Math Learning: why certain math education failed"
date: 2023-7-22 10:27:00
categories: life
tags: EN math teaching
---

* content
{:toc}

>君子既知教之所由兴，又知教之所由废，然后可以为人师也。--- 《学记》


> Only after a virtuous person knows the causes which make teaching successful, and those which make it of no effect, he or she can proceed to become a teacher of others. --- *Record on the Subject of Education, Book of Rites*
​

Recently I came across a lot of criticism against prevalent mistakes and flaws seen in math education. This post is my attempt to briefly summarize them and provide a little reflection.




# Lack of purpose

"Why are we learning this? Because we are told to do so." In "A Mathematician's Lament"[1], Paul Lockhart points out this widespread nonsense. Students are told to memorize formula, plug in numbers, solve equations, without knowing why in the world they need to do all those things. They are in a race against their peers, going from algebra to precalculus, then calculus, and then multivariable calculus. Where do all these lead? "Nothing". Teachers failed to demonstrate how such formula is of any use, and sometimes they don't even know what all these things are about, other than the fact that they are required to pass a test.


# Bogus dichotomy

An approach against the previous problem is to discourage any kind of painstaking rote learning (memorization based on repetition), or sometimes even basic exercise. Sometimes it gets too radical and students find themselves short of practice. People who stand for this approach argue that students can then appreciate the "concept" more, and it is more important than the "basic skills" school ask them to obtain. In his paper[2], Hung-Hsi Wu argues that such dichotomy is artificial and students apparently need both to fully obtain a concrete understanding of math. Can students really appreciate the concept without rigorous practice? Is a shallow appreciation of the "aesthetics of math", if they dare to call it that, without concrete understanding sufficient?


# Lack of Connection

Math is the science of patterns, as Keith Devlin sharply points out. A pattern is this recurring motif extrapolates to a broad spectrum of things, and this identical motif is what connects those things we observe patterns from. However, different units of many math courses are organized in the exact opposite way. Sometimes important concepts are left behind, and jumping to a totally irrelevant topic makes it worse. The common pattern of unexpectedly related things is one of the most beautiful theme in math that teachers should not overlook.


# Lack of Rigor

As Hung-Hsi Wu argues in one of his math education books[3], K-12 math textbooks or the teachers using them usually does not give precise definition, and this often result in later confusion. "Graph of an inequality", "half-plane", they don't define things exclusively "because these terms sound so familiar that Textbook School Mathematics apparently believes no definition is necessary." However, this is the most dangerous among all problems listed. The study of mathematics uses precise language, and what are we doing to our students, telling them that they can understand terms that are not previously defined and just *guess* what it can mean? The worst of them all is to never tell students the precise definition.



# Discussion

To provide a humbly trivial proposal, let me suggest that, genuine math learning experience is never easy and fun. It must be fun, since we are trying to stimulate the intellect, but this process should not be effortless all the time. If the students are not pushing beyond their limits, you are doing it wrong. It must contain those occasions which are, as Lockhart describes, "painful and creatively frustrating".
By the way, to help solve these common problems, I still find the 5e model relevant. 5e model is a science teaching model popularized by BSCS(Biological Sciences Curriculum Study) education center, standing for how science course can be constructed each unit: Engaging learners, Exploring phenomena, Explaining phenomena, Elaborating concepts and abilities, and Evaluating learners. Since every math exploration also has a purpose, this exploration model must be useful. Allow me to explore more on that and get back to you, my dear readers.

Let me end this post by an ideal vision I found in Wu's book (modified quote), which hopefully can one day be a widespread reality:

- Every concept has a clear definition.
- Every statement is precise.  
- Every assertion is supported by reasoning.
- Every math development is coherent.
- And every development is purposeful.




# Reference

[1]Lockhart, Paul Douglas. *A Mathematician’s Lament: How School Cheats Us out of Our Most Fascinating and Imaginative Art Form.* Bellevue Literary Press, 2009.

[2] Wu, Hung-hsi. “Basic Skills versus Conceptual Understanding. A Bogus Dichotomy in Mathematics Education.” The American Educator 23 (1999): n. pag.

[3] Wu, Hung-Hsi. Pre-Calculus, Calculus, and Beyond. American Mathematical Society, 2020.
